At the time, our most accurate
measurements relied on star
triangulation, which meant that the
actual distances between continents and
cities could be off by over 100 km. And
so, scientists used Echo to map the
exact location of various points all
around Earth. First, they measured the
signal travel time from two different
locations, which would give them the
distance to Echo. Then, by measuring the
angle that Echo appeared in the sky, the
scientists could form a triangle. With
this, the distance between both points
could be calculated to within a few
meters. This made our measurements of
the Earth around 10 times more accurate.
But, the science didn't stop there with
Echo. After all, NASA was only a couple
years old at the time and very little
was known about the long-term effects
that satellites would experience in
space. One of the biggest unknowns was
atmospheric drag. Even at an altitude of
1,500 km, there are tiny traces of
atmosphere that will slow down objects
in orbit. And with such a large surface
area, these balloons felt the effect
more than any other satellite. Thanks to
Echo 1, NASA were able to track how its
orbit changed over several years. As it
turned out, it changed a lot.
Surprisingly, atmospheric drag had
nothing to do with this. Instead, the
solar wind, which radiates out from the
sun, was pushing Echo 1 towards Earth.
These two balloons continued to work
perfectly throughout the '60s and they
proved that a global communication
system in space was a good idea.